ETC Course: 6. ETC Is the Original Chain (#1068)
ethereumclassic/ethereumclassic.github.io: content/blog/2023-01-26-ethereum-classic-course-6-ethereum-classic-is-the-original-chain/index.md

---
title: "Ethereum Classic Course: 6. Ethereum Classic Is the Original Chain"
date: 2023-01-26
author: Donald McIntyre
contributors: ["DonaldMcIntyre"]
tags: ["Course", "Education"]
linkImage: ./etc-course-banner.png
---

---
**You can listen to or watch this video here:**

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/HksfzNs48uo" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share" allowfullscreen></iframe>

---

## History: How Ethereum Split From Ethereum Classic

![Ethereum Is a Fork of Ethereum Classic.](./etc-course-eth-split-banner.png)

As we explained in the previous class, Ethereum (ETH) used the base technology of Bitcoin, a distributed ledger updated through proof of work based Nakamoto Consensus, but added programmability to the network.

It may sound counterintuitive because the industry has been misinformed for a long time, but Ethereum Classic (ETC) is actually the original and real Ethereum network founded by Vitalik Buterin.

> The reason for this is that ETH split from ETC on July 20 of 2016. The cause for the split was The DAO hack and subsequent reversal of funds.

Author: Done, thank you.

The way it works is that it has over 120 computing operation codes, or opcodes for short, that together provide near full computability.

Because node software clients may be installed in many kinds of computers with diverse operating systems, the EVM enables nodes to operate in their local environments with their local machines, and at the same time interact with the global network of blockchain nodes with a single and compatible computing standard.

This assures a unified way of operating the network and executing smart contracts inside the secure environment of Ethereum Classic.

## 2. A Programming Language

For software programs to be sent and stored in the network, and executed by the EVM, there had to be some programming languages that would be compatible and adapted for a blockchain environment.

Solidity was one of the programming languages that were created to write programs for Ethereum, and remains to this day the most popular one for building dapps on Ethereum and Ethereum Classic.

> It is syntactically similar to JavaScript, which is widely used by many developers around the world, but it is adapted so it may work on a decentralized peer-to-peer setting.

Reviewer: Line 82: Usage
```suggestion
It is syntactically similar to JavaScript which is widely used by many developers around the world but has been adapted so it may work in a decentralized peer-to-peer setting.
```

## 4. The Gas System

Basically, the 120 plus opcodes that work with the EVM have a specific cost in a unit called gas to be executed. When users send their transactions, they need to pay for the corresponding gas for miners to execute them.

This payment serves as compensation to miners and imposes a cost per transaction, which reduces spam significantly.

The gas system also imposes a limit of computation cycles that the ETC miners must use to resolve specific executions. If this limit is reached without results, then miners must stop and return the money to users. This solves what is called the halting problem, which is when machines get stuck when trying to resolve a computation.

## 5. The ETChash Mining Algorithm

One of the unique features of Ethereum Classic is the ETChash mining algorithm.

As Ethereum was using the ETHash algorithm, Ethereum Classic had to differentiate its mining format to defend itself from 51% attacks that came from the Ethereum computing base. This led to the creation of ETChash.

> ETChash is a modification of ETHash where one component, the DAG, which is a large file that must be used during the mining process, was reduced in size and its size growth was slowed to permit smaller GPU miners; with GPU card capacities that had lower memories, such as 3GB, 4GB, and 6GB; mine and stay mining in Ethereum Classic for a longer period of time.

Reviewer: Line 106: Rewrite structure
```suggestion
ETChash is a modification of ETHash wherein one component, a large file called the DAG that must be used during the mining process, was reduced in size and slowed in size growth. This permits miners using GPU cards with a lower amount of memory, such as 3GB, 4GB, or 6GB of VRAM, to mine and stay mining on Ethereum Classic for a longer period of time.
```

Reviewer: Currently, the DAG size on ETC is ~3.2GB.

GPUs with less than 4GB of VRAM are already unable to mine ETC.
